Notes

Scientific Process in Clinical Research
1) Observation/Pattern
2) Research Question
3) Hypothesis
4) Study Design/Data Collection
5) Statistical Analysis
6) Results/Conclusion

The primary outcome is a specific characteristic that is most suitable to answer the research quesiton. it is: 
  -measurable: a value can be computed for every individual in the study
  -clinically meaningful: a good proxy for the clinical phenomenon under study
  -of greatest importance: the characteristic the researcher is most interested in

Hawthorne effect: If individuals in a study know they are being watched or observed, their behavior may be different. This can introduce an observation bias into the data


## Measurement Timing:

Single Observation: one measurement at one point in time for each participant

Longitudinal: repeated information on each study participant in order to measure change over time

Spatial: collects a set of variables in different location on each observaitonal unit at one point in time, with an intnen to determine if some geographic areas are different from others

##

Our three observational study designs we will examine:
  -Cohort
  -Case-Control
  -Cross-Sectional

Cohort study is usually prospective, each cohort is usually risk factor or exposure.
We can estimate conditional probabilities that do not require knowleged of the relative proportions of exposed and unexposed in the population.

Case-control study is usually retrospective, observational study in which the people are selected form those falling into the categories of the outcome
We can estimate conditional probabilities that do not require knowledge of the relative proportions of diseased and non dieseased in the population

Matched controls: controls are selected to be matched individually to a particular case on the basis of other characteristics, such as age, sex, presence/absense of comorbitidites, etc.

Cross-sectional study: an observational study in which data are collected on study units at only one point in time. Both a cohort study and a case-control study can be cross-sectional.
Can be used to:
  - snapshot of pop
  - prevalence of disease or risk factors
  - usually used for associations, not causality; because we don't have temporal information

Cohort 
adv: can determine which info will be collected, can discover long term realtionships between exposure and multiple diseases
disadv: 
1. Expensive to follow people over time and some participants may drop out of
the study or be difficult to find.
2. Must be careful about choosing the outcome of interest (endpoint) to
monitor at the start.
3. Must wait until a pre-specified number of endpoints are observed to be able
to draw conclusions. (Can take a long time.)
4. Can be hard to determine who was actually “exposed” and who was not.
5. To observe rare events, you need very large cohorts.

Case-control
adv: cheaper, retrospective (easy data to access), easy to study rare diseases because we just oversample that group, reduce confounding effects using something like matching
disadv: 
1. Difficult to select a truly comparable control group (selection bias). May miss
some important confounders.
2. Study participants may not be able to recall the past correctly (recall bias).
3. Desired data may not be available in your databases (missingness).

Cross-sectional
adv: all measurementas as snapchot, can do prevalence on a SRS
disadv: 
1. Response bias: those who don’t participate may be different from those who do.
2. Since only one time-point, cannot assess causal or time-dependent relationships.
(Which came first? Lack of exercise or heart disease?)
3. Prevalence/incidence bias, meaning that if a risk factor results in a quick death,
those people will not be in your sample. It will look like that risk factor does not
have a lot of impact.
4. Rare outcomes of interest need very large studies.

^^Those are all observational studies^^

##Experimental Studies

Clinical Trials
  prospective experiment that looks at interventions, diets, training, basically a "treatment"
  better for causal claims
  can be randomized or not
  randomized trial is different from random sample, randomized trial means they are randomly assigned to placebo or experiment (can be other groups)
  usually collects multiple measures over time to monitor safety and assess efficacy
  
Strengths:
  assigning causality
  restrictive inclusion criteria enhance ability to measure effect of treatment without interference of other impactors
  prospective nature gives researchers the control over what is collected
  must be approved based on prior evidence and potential impact and safety
  must be monitored for safety
  
Weaknesses:
  Often expensive
  can take a long time
  subject to missing data, dropout of participants
  since inclusion criteria may be restrictive inferences are also restricted to that population, less applicable to general population

Pragmatic Trials
  Similar to clinical trials but more open and 'real-world'
  still study arms
  still causal claims
  drawback: inclusion/exclusion criteria is more open, it could "muddy-up" treatment effects
  
Lab Experimants
  exactly what they sound like
  do not involve humans
  usually small number of sampling units, completed quickly
  
SRS: a sample where everyone in the pop has equal probability of being in the sample

Stratified:
  Partition population into K strata, sample from each stratum
  
  proportionate stratification: 2% from each strata
  disproportionate stratification: n = 30 from each strata
  
One stage cluster: separate pop into clusters, but sample an entire randomly selected cluster.
Two-stage cluster: take SRS from n randomly selected clusters

